content/study/_index.md, before:

I teach meditation and psychoanalysis: with these tools I can help you grow into a powerful human creature.

## Goals

* We will address *anxiety*: most of us suffer from some form of chronic doubt and useless hypervigilance, which must be realigned. Rather than lull it to sleep with more soporifics, we will consider your anxiety a functional response to unhealthy conditions, which can be gradually changed.
* We will address *despair*: most of us suffer from a sense of meaninglessness, which must be taken seriously. Rather than feed you more premature gratification and buyer's remorse, my method allows the kind of gentle emptiness which draws out feelings of futility and pointlessness, so that they may be addressed like the ancestral guardians they are.
* We will address *confusion*: most of us suffer from a sense that the answers are out of reach or nonexistent. This is some of the hardest work we'll do, because the solution is always unique: a spiritual life is hungry fickle fire.

![desert](/landscape.jpg)

## Meditation

We discard the absurd fantasies and priestly agendas which have plagued meditative practice: I teach meditation as a form of remedial neuronal training. We're interested in the frontiers of human potential: my method seeks to exploit nonlinear emergence via conditioning of the many unconscious subsystems, which produces a far greater yield of intelligent behaviors at the conscious niveaux than the usual topdown approach.

## Psychoanalysis

Free association and the training in unconscious semantics is one of the most powerful weapons available in the war for spiritual growth. I can teach you to employ that vast domain of intelligence and intuition which most of us cannot reliably access.

When these methods work together, you should become more incisive yet receptive, energetic yet restful, imaginative yet factual, playful yet serious.

## Background

* Meditation: 20+ years of practice. I've studied within the Buddhist, Yogic, Native American, and Daoist disciplines: from each I learned something essential I'm prepared to pass on.
* Psychoanalysis: I have postgraduate-level training within New York psychoanalytic circles, with direct lineage to Lacan.
* Engineering: I'm a former software engineer and lifelong student of practical engineering, including offgrid living. I try to approach spirituality with the precision and robustness more commonly found in these fields.

![doors](/doors.png)

## Details

Remote sessions weekly. Personalized desert retreats available: let the big blue sky and the yellow dirt transform you. We will camp, meditate, walk, talk, and work.

Sliding scale fees. Scholarships and discounts for those who qualify. If you want to work with me, say so: I will teach anyone who's passionate.

## Contact

yo@bartholomy.ooo

Commit message:

study update: removed goals section

content/study/_index.md, after:

I teach meditation, psychoanalysis, and psychedelic intervention: with these tools I can help you grow into a powerful human creature.

![desert](/landscape.jpg)

## Psychedelia

There's a growing mainstream acceptance of what has been obvious to many of us for a long time: episodic psychedelic intervention by a qualified and mature practitioner is one of the most effective treatments for a variety of depressions, addictions, and traumas. Some of the exotic metabolic paths invoked by these substances actually stimulate neural regrowth within core areas responsible for long-term memory, emotive association, and sense of self. There's no better time than the present to find your path.

## Meditation

We discard the absurd fantasies and priestly agendas which have plagued meditative practice: I teach meditation as a form of remedial neuronal training. We're interested in the frontiers of human potential: my method seeks to exploit nonlinear emergence via conditioning of the many unconscious subsystems, which produces a far greater yield of intelligent behaviors at the conscious niveaux than the usual topdown approach.

## Psychoanalysis

Free association and the training in unconscious semantics is one of the most powerful weapons available in the war for spiritual growth. I can teach you to employ that vast domain of intelligence and intuition which most of us cannot reliably access.

When these methods work together, you should become more incisive yet receptive, energetic yet restful, imaginative yet factual, playful yet serious.

## Background

* Meditation: 20+ years of practice. I've studied within the Buddhist, Yogic, Native American, and Daoist disciplines: from each I learned something essential I'm prepared to pass on.
* Psychoanalysis: I have postgraduate-level training within New York psychoanalytic circles, with direct lineage to Lacan.
* Psychedelia: I've been trained in the use of Peyote both with the Navajo of Arizona and the Huichol of Mexico. I'm considered a qualified "fireman". I've also studied the Ayahausca ritual in Peru and am well-versed in the therapeutic use of psilocybin.
* Engineering: I'm a former software engineer and lifelong student of practical engineering, including offgrid living. I try to approach spirituality with the precision and robustness more commonly found in these fields.

![doors](/doors.png)

## Details

- Video sessions weekly.

- Desert retreats semi-annually: let the big blue sky and the yellow dirt transform you. We will make medicine, meditate, walk, talk, and work.

- Sliding scale fees. Scholarships and discounts for those who qualify. If you want to work with me, say so: I will teach anyone who's passionate.

## Contact

[Book a free consultation](https://bartholomy.setmore.com/beta/book?step=time-slot&products=b72af6bd-73f2-4784-9ed3-4c8897d5b58d&staff=6cfdce59-41e9-4963-8cf6-b549219397f8&staffSelected=true)
