content/about/_index.md, before:

Bartholomy is a teacher, psychoanalyst, and research engineer living offgrid in the high desert of Nevada.

{{< raw >}}

<img class="narrow" src="/jerk.jpg"/>

{{< /raw >}}

---

I have a unique background. Some highlights are a philosophy education in Germany, an apprenticeship with a Sufi musician, ethnological study of healing ceremony with the Lakota Sioux and the Shipibo of Peru, the psychoanalytic training in NYC, and a stint in engineering at Google.

My goal is to address emergent 21st century problems with the power of *humanitas* in the ancient sense: to be a complete human creature, to seek health in all its transpositions, to become more intelligent with a holistic strength of body and a rocksteady emotional platform. My work strives to combine the imaginative potential of the traditional *medicine path* with the rigor and precision of the scientific method, bridged and tuned by meditative discipline.

---

* Talk to me: yo@bartholomy.ooo

* [study with me](/study/)

* [support my work](/support/)

* [subscribe](/subscribe/)

Commit message:

about with meta description for seo

content/about/_index.md, after:

---
description: "Bartholomy teaches meditation, psychoanalysis, and psychedelic intervention."
---

Bartholomy teaches meditation, psychoanalysis, and psychedelic intervention. He lives in the high desert of Nevada.

{{< raw >}}

<img class="narrow" src="/jerk.jpg"/>

{{< /raw >}}

---

I have a unique background. Some highlights are a philosophy education in Germany, an apprenticeship with a Sufi musician, ethnological study of healing ceremony with the Lakota Sioux and the Shipibo of Peru, the psychoanalytic training in NYC, and a stint in engineering at Google.

My goal is to address emergent 21st century problems with the power of *humanitas* in the ancient sense: to be a complete human creature, to seek health in all its transpositions, to become more intelligent with a holistic strength of body and a rocksteady emotional platform. My work strives to combine the imaginative potential of the traditional *medicine path* with the rigor and precision of the scientific method, bridged and tuned by meditative discipline.

---

* Talk to me: yo@bartholomy.ooo

* [study with me](/study/)

* [support my work](/support/)

* [subscribe](/subscribe/)
