# Privacy Policy

hautogdoad LLC operates the website "Bartholomy" at https://www.bartholomy.ooo. We take your privacy seriously. To better protect your privacy, we provide this privacy policy notice explaining the way your personal information is collected and used.

# Collection of Routine Information

This website tracks basic information about its visitors. This information includes, but is not limited to, IP addresses, browser details, timestamps and referring pages. None of this information can personally identify specific visitors to this website. The information is tracked for routine administration and maintenance purposes.

# Cookies

This website does not use cookies. This is a "static" site generated by [Hugo](https://gohugo.io), meaning it appears the same for every visitor and there is no login portal.

# Advertisement

This website does not use advertisement.

# Google Analytics

This website uses Google Analytics to track visitor activities on this website. Such tracking is done directly by the third parties through their servers and is subject to their privacy policies. This website has no access or control over these cookies, scripts and/or web beacons that may be used by third parties.

We are not responsible for the privacy policies of Google Analytics. You should be aware that their privacy policies may differ from our own.

[Google Analytics Privacy Policy](https://policies.google.com/privacy)

# Newsletter subscription

hautogdoad LLC offers an educational newsletter and collects email addresses to that purpose. These email addresses are stored by [Buttondown LLC](https://buttondown.email) and their use is subject to their terms of service.

# Consultation services

hautogdoad LLC offers educational [consultation services](/study/) in accordance with these [terms of service](/study/terms). All client information, including but not limited to name, email address, and other personal details are confidential. Emails exchanged between hautogdoad LLC and clients are administered by Google Workspace and Gmail, and therefore subject to their terms of service.

The security of your personal information is important to us, but remember that no method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100% secure. While we strive to use commercially acceptable means to protect your personal information, we cannot guarantee its absolute security.

# Changes To This Privacy Policy

This Privacy Policy is effective as of 2024-05-01 and will remain in effect except concerning any changes in its provisions in the future, which will be in effect immediately after being posted on this page. We reserve the right to update or change our Privacy Policy at any time and you should check this Privacy Policy periodically. If we make any material changes to this Privacy Policy, we will notify you either through the email address you have provided us or by placing a prominent notice on our website.

# Contact Information

For any questions or concerns regarding the privacy policy, please send us an email at [yo@bartholomy.ooo](mailto:yo@bartholomy.ooo).
