---
title: "Facilitated Variation"
summary: "Biological Byzantine Fault Recovery"
slug: "facilitated-variation"
draft: false
date: 2023-05-28T14:33:03-07:00
place: "Fool's Bluff, Nevada"
thumbnail: 'thumbnails/0152.witch_hunt.png'
images: ['covers/0152.witch_hunt.jpg']
tags: ['psychoanalysis']
---

One of the most important lessons I learned in my days as an engineer, is the importance of *scalability*: it seems to me that very few biologists have internalized this principle, nor learned how to apply it when theorizing about living systems - however, there are signs this is changing in the field of genetics. For example, the accumulating evidence for the ubiquity of *facilitated variation* in the inherited genome: ontogenesis doesn't code for precise locations for nerves, veins and other networks in the body, but runs precisely tuned algorithms for the *process* of ennervation, vascularization, and so on, which respond to the growing bones such that only a few parameters need be changed to produce either a mastiff or a chihuahua.

So what makes for scalability?

* Minimal dependencies
* Minimal representation
* Minimal and rigorous specification of homogenous units
* Redunancy
* Error recovery

The more that a field of interest can be characterized as a collection of interchangeable units with predictable properties, the more scalable it becomes. This also enables *redundancy*, since many such objects can perform overlapping tasks - such as many nerves serving the same region; thereafter *Byzantine fault recovery* becomes easier due to redundancy.

It may seem like vulnerable design to form a neural topology dependent upon its constituents in absence of a global coordinate, but the probable truth is that errors generated by any one subset are generally compensated for by its neighbors - and that the kind of error we've been considering in phantom limb syndrome, only occurs when a significant portion of the network is missing.

## Prevalence

The prevalence of *facilitated variaton* in everything the organism does, should make enduring neuroplasticity and the *regenerative* character of apperception as I'm portraying it, seem a little less exceptional. Neural systems are just like everything else organic: they must be able to adapt to a changing environment, and not just during ontogenesis. The reason meditative practice can have such enduring effects, is that despite the "hardwiring" of dendritic architecture, it seems that most neural activity is a function with many parameters and few constants. This is what connectionist artificial neural networks reproduce, albeit crudely. It seems improbable that *backpropagation* adequately reproduces neural function: it's the rare situation in which a precise answer to "how correct was the last guess" is given to the organism - another artifact of the bad assumptions of the laboratory clerk. However, feedback is obviously involved: so much so, that models of self-organizing criticality and stochastic resonance are much more convincing, and reminiscent of what it feels like to be alive.
