---
title: "Kill the Buddha"
summary: "Bartholomy's new book"
slug: ktb
draft: false
date: 2025-03-17T16:45:57-07:00
thumbnail: "thumbnails/ktb_thumbnail.png"
images: ["covers/ktb_720w.png"]
tags: [buddhism, meditation, neuromorphism]
theme: fuschsiaparty
---

My latest book [is now available](https://www.amazon.com/dp/1737889439).

---

Has anyone considered what it means, that the descendants of the world's most devoted *fire cult*, one day wished for "extinguishment"?

From *Agni* to *Buddha*: almost a paradigmatic study in cultural degeneracy... That a culture does not only grow tired, but *sick* of itself: precisely that which animated the ancestors, is one day experienced as the root of evil.

---

Without violent intemperate people, asceticism is never realized - and we are only Buddhists "in theory", in the café, mouthpieces of armchair nihilism. But "armchair nihilism" is the only kind of true nihilism: one no longer has the courage for anything. To be a *weapon* in the fight for nihilistic perspectives is not to be a nihilist at all.

Therefore the worst kind of Buddhism is "in theory": the ascetic practice is meant to revive and *preserve* the violent instincts, to provide a vehicle for its preservation across the vast valley of maladaptation. Without ascetic discipline, one is merely degeneracy, merely indulgent on all fronts, merely seeking blamelessness with a minimum of cost.

---

Buddhism must be *resisted*: it should be studied as a refinement of poisons, as an articulate sickness, as the most elegant nihilism yet devised.

Buddhism represents the danger to the human soul in this path of civilized collectivism: a danger because it is so correct, so realistic, so kind in its administrations - the kindest and most noble castration yet devised. A domestication of the ape which seeks to afford him maximum dignity, maximum self-respect, maximum equanimity: the Buddhist as compassionate zookeeper. The idea is *preemptive self-castration*: the practitioner leads the way, becomes a paragon of modern virtue, and maintains no illusions about his chances as an animal. To be Buddhist is to be *collaborator*: to transform the conspiracy against the resistive elements in humanity into a noble spiritual quest. To anticipate and exceed the requirements of prostration and the annihilation of instinct, to make the torment of this annihilation into a field of battle and a proud subtle violence, the "final frontier". That Buddhism represents a resurgence of the nomadic pride, warped and halfdead, but possibly more violent than ever: it wants to see instinct not only dead, but its root cut out, extinguished, extinct. The *extinction* of the type "man": to that end, the violent instincts must be greatly refined, both reducing their scope while enhancing their accuracy. The great correction one must make to all postaxial morality, is never to believe its claims to have eliminated nor wished for the end of violence, but a *change in target*.
